---
layout: post
title: How to make small projects more profitable than large ones
tags: 
permalink: /profits
author: Robert Williams
date: 2015-09-08 08:13:00
---

> “I won't touch projects that have budgets smaller than $30,000. Anything lower is usually low-quality and unprofitable for me.”

That's a statement I get periodically from Workshop customers. (I'm not sure why $30,000 is the magical number for quality and profitability but it is apparently.)

What I don't get about this statement is that it's usually coming from a freelancer, aka a one-person business, who's overhead costs are essentially zero (yes I know you pay $20/month for project management software). 

What's even more confusing is that these people claim to be "desperate for work" and sometimes even in a dry spell. Yet most of these freelancers "won't touch" a large portion of potential projects because initial budgets are too low. 

To me, this is outrageous. In what world are we living where a $5,000-$10,000 project is unprofitable for  one-person? Is the problem here really a dollar amount that's too low, or is it that you don't know how to make a project of any size profitable?

### The big problem with big budgets

Sure 5-figure projects look great at first. You've got a far away deadline and a big wad of cash. At the start, the possibilities seem endless. However, these big projects also end up hurting freelancers a lot of the time.

For example, big price tags push hiring companies into thinking they own you. Unless you're actively pushing back on this, you'll naturally give in to more client requests regardless of their validity.

That's when you feel scope creep start to kick in. You feel pressure to say yes to features and other requests that you don’t think should be implemented because hey you're getting paid a small fortune. On the other side, clients start to feel like they want more bang for their buck. 

When you finally deliver the work, there’s endless revisions. Deadlines come and go without shipping anything. Projects drag on and on. Each day carving both you and your client's profitability away.

If you're not able to make a $5,000 project profitable, you're less likely to make a larger, more complicated project profitable.  

After all, what exactly about a larger amount of work is easier to scope out and turn a profit on? Larger projects are by definition harder to make profitable because there's more work to... try make profitable. 

That's why I think freelancers should focus on making smaller projects more profitable before they move on to larger projects. If you can make a 5,000 projects profitable for you and your clients, you can also make a 5-figure budget profitable for you and your clients.

### What are you delivering?

You might think everything you're delivering on those big $30k+ projects is essential. However, have you really examined what exactly is bringing your costs up so high that you can only afford to take on 5-figure projects?

I think you'll find most of your budget goes to:

- Research
- Meetings
- Presentations
- Revisions
- Exploration
- Outsourcing
- Emailing
- Following up

What if you cut the bulk of these costs and replaced them with nothing? Would the client be worse off? If not, then you should do it. 

It will make your business more viable. It will make your client's business more viable. It'll give you less of a headache. You'll be able to focus on things that actually matter instead of fluff. 

Won't cutting these things make you less money?

No. Everything listed above is also hard to quantify. That's why it's hard to scope a large project accurately. You might think these things all carry a high margin but I disagree. 

I think if you really examined them, you'd find out they're not that profitable for you either. 


### Decide what matters.

So how can taking less money be a good idea?

Here’s a quote from a [great reddit thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/freelance/comments/35lpsc/i_charge_30k60k_for_wordpress_websites_with_a/) about a guy who’s charging $50,000 for simple Wordpress websites with nothing much to them.

> Should customers care about brand? Yes. But should they care about it more than sales? 80% of businesses fail in the first year, and I’m guessing a big part of it is paying someone $50 an hour to make a 10 page website that generates a net zero result for their business.

This is a great point. This guy is actually making a case for charging much more than



### Present it as a package.

Maybe that kind of self-critical price analysis is what we should be doing with our service on a normal basis. 

That’s why I think dabbling in creating a service offering where you’re actually charging less is smart. Especially if it means you’re working with a company you can actually help instead of some shitty startup. 

It would allow you to say no to more projects. It would open you up to working with different types of businesses that could have never afforded you before.

Clients you might actually enjoy working with.


As a B2B service provider, it’s also in your best interest to make sure your service provides a profit for your clients.
That’s why it’s important to ask if the money you’re getting paid is a sound investment for the company who’s hiring you. By taking it are you really helping the company you’re being hired to help? 

See even disregarding the fact that if you want repeat business by definition your client’s have to stay in business… freelancing and consulting success is based on reputation. 

You build that reputation by creating results. Those results are helping businesses make more money than they spend on you.

If a client hires you and you honestly don’t think you can help them, it hurts you in the long run to take on that work.

The problem is freelancers don’t even ask themselves this question. I know because I didn’t either. I’d take on any project that met my price.


Can you find ways to work for less and still make it more profitable?

That’s what [some](http://draft.nu/revise) [freelancers](http://websiterescues.com) [are doing](http://landingpageinaday.com), so it is possible. 



### Next step


There’s never been a better time to be a designer or developer. You’re in demand. You build websites and apps and things that are valuable. So valuable in fact, people will pay you a lot of money.

(While I do agree that some highly-specialized consultants shouldn't work for less than $X0,000 – I don't think that's the case for 90% of people.)

Of course you should always charge more. Of course you should double your rate today. Of course. 

But maybe the current pricing model for freelancing is not all it’s cracked up to be in the long run.


Ask yourself:

- What would you do if instead you had to make a $3k project profitable?
- Specifically, what would you have to cut out?
- Can you afford to hire you? Why not?
- Would it make sense to hire yourself?




But working for less doesn’t make any sense right? All you hear is you should double and triple your rates. 

The problem is by doing this you might be pricing yourself out of the reach of businesses who will actually survive. The mom and pop shops, the family businesses, etc. 

Why? Because they’re not able to compete with funded startups on spending money on a designer/developer.

By not working with them you’re also not learning about what makes these companies tick. You’re only learning about internet companies. Will this specialization pay off?

And who’s to say that the only measure of profitability is the total project price. Today you could only take on projects worth a fraction of the typical startup budget and essentially double or triple your rates. 

But it would take you being very efficient with your time. 

Ask yourself this question. If hiring a freelancer like you for $30-40k is such a great investment, why haven’t you found a way to hire yourself for your own business (or someone like you) at that rate? 

You’d probably cut out a lot of extra shit you don’t need to be doing anyway, like:

Client’s would no longer get 2 meetings per week. You would have to limit their project to 1 revision. You would only present one design or app option. You would cut out all except the most basic features.

You’d work less and produce more. You’d have more freedom to express your expert opinion because you wouldn’t feel tied down to any single client. Because you’d have more of them. 

All by putting a limit on how much you could be paid. 

And guess what? It would probably result in a more successful and profitable project for all sides. 


### Great reading:

- [Get Paid! How to make projects more profitable](/class)
- [13 ways designers screw up client presentation](https://medium.com/@monteiro/13-ways-designers-screw-up-client-presentations-51aaee11e28c)
- [My lead-generation service called Workshop](http://letsworkshop.com)

