---
layout: post
title: Tiny goals, tiny products, tiny businesses
tags: business
permalink: tiny
author: Robert Williams
date: 2015-04-03 09:54:00
---

Have you ever wanted to do something that seemed impossible? Something that seemed completely out of reach? That feeling sucks but doesn't stop you from wanting it. 

It's usually something big you want too. You might even have one or two of these goals right now, like building a big company, finding your soul mate, or landing a million dollar client. Any way you dice them those are big challenges. 

But they shouldn't be. All of these things should actually start off small, like things that are long-lasting and strong. Strong things, whether they're natural or man-made tend to start small. 

A great huge oak tree starts from a seed. It takes hundreds of years to become strong and mighty. Maybe we should give ourselves the same opportunity.

Two life-long partners in a loving relationship start as complete strangers. They start by meeting with a tiny interaction. Usually, the word "hello.". Thousands of hours of conversations and intimacy would never happen if it wasn't for that fragile tiny interaction.

Not just that, things that stay small for longer tend to be better. A tree that shoots up too quickly, doesn't have the necessary roots beneath it to sustain it's weight. A large federal mandate will usually waste billions of dollars in tax payer money, something a small local government isn't likely to do.

When you have large goals and race to meet them, what are you glossing over?

Starting small is an advantage because you escape the pressures of a large object. You can hide, you can learn, you can grow. 

It's the same in business. Starting with millions of dollars (through investments or whatever) just means you are starting with a big target on your back. 

I'm proud of the way my business started. It started tiny. I started with a landing page I made in minutes. My product was a newsletter. To one person. Tiny. 

Yet, it's made me hundreds of thousands of dollars and advanced my career to reach some of my biggest dreams - so why are we so hesitant to start something tiny?

Are you? If so, share with me your one tiny idea. Let's make it even tinier. Email me (robert@letsworkshop.com).

Disagree with me? What great lasting things (including in nature) start out large?

**Further reading on the topic / useful related articles and resources:**

- [Why You Should Do A Tiny Product First](https://unicornfree.com/2013/why-you-should-do-a-tiny-product-first)