---
layout: post
title: How to use Twitter to find leads
tags: market
permalink: /advice/market-twitter
author: Robert Williams
date: 2015-06-16 22:00:00
---

You're probably not friends with the hundreds of people who turn to twitter looking for help on projects everyday.

That's why the most common thing freelancers do when they want to find work VIA Twitter yields no results. It's usually tweeting something like:

> Hey friends, I'm available for projects!

Followed by...

> Hey guy - I'm looking for freelancer work.. 

And finally...

> help ... someone?

Followed by waiting. 

This approach is like expecting to find your next client by yelling into an echo-y cave with no one in it. 

As an example, if you wanted to find the love of your life and had no clue where they lived, who they were, or anything about them you probably wouldn't post a notice at a supermarket saying seeking love. 

Instead a sounder approach would be to actually approach someone who appears to be a match, directly. 

For example: you might text or call someone who gives you their number. You might approach someone at a bar or a dating website. 

All of these are better options than the grocery store posting because they're going to where the fish are. 

Instead of expecting fate to intervene, you're giving yourself the best chance. You should do the same with twitter. 

So why post in your empty silo that is your twitter audience? 

Instead, If you want to harness the power of twitter, try using something like [Topsy](http://topsy.com). Searching through all the clutter on twitter can take hours and you probably wont find very much via their default search.

Instead, a service like Topsy can help you customize and sort your search more effectively. 

In addition to using words like freelance, design, and development - add words like “email” (to find people who leave behind an email address). Follow up with them over email instead of just on twitter. You can also set reminders and notifications via google alerts or tweetdeck.

The key is to sort through the multitudes of tweets out there by finding keywords people use when tweeting out for help and approaching them directly in a one to one setting. 

Not expecting your desperate tweets to bring in work.
