---
layout: post
title: Before you update your portfolio again, read this
tags: 
permalink: /deleted
author: Robert Williams
date: 2015-09-08 08:13:00
---
It started fresh out of college. 

I'd spend a countless hours working on my portfolio. Constantly tweaking it, making sure it was just right.

At the time, I was making a nice salary, but I didn’t feel like my time was valued so I was on the look out for a new job. This worsened when new management was brought in.

One day, my new boss called me into his office to “chat,” and I distinctly remember thinking “God, I hope I get fired.”

Before I even sat down, a man I had only known for 2 weeks took a deep breath and let me know I was getting let go. (This came only 2 months after receiving a raise for my ‘great performance with the company’ — go figure).

So I was left with the same 3 options that everyone in this industry has:

1. Work for an advertising/design agency.
2. Work for another company or startup.
3. Start my own independent consultancy, full-time.

After meditating on my options (and laying on the beach for a week) I came to the conclusion that I would try to make freelancing my full-time business.

In my first 6 months I ended up making about $30k. That may not seem like a lot to you, but it was a huge liberation to me.

When I decided to start my own business, my mind shifted — I began to look at everything I did as a strategic system for getting new clients.

Once I did this, I realized I needed to stand out. If I was going to reach clients more effectively than the average freelancer online, I needed to have a better strategy. 

So, I looked at all the freelance designer portfolios online — aka my competition. 

Most had great work, and they all looked pretty similar. Honestly, not too different from my own work.

Almost all the portfolios I came across had no copy, just pictures. If they did write something, it was usually something short and catchy like, "pixel perfection" or "less is more."

I came to the conclusion that freelance designers were focusing on portraying a “cool” image that they wanted to see in themselves. 

I had spent literally thousands of hours on my portfolio since graduating college and the thought of spending more time on it was not an option. Plus, I realized clients didn't care about "cool"  they cared about "professional" and "trustworthy."

**I decided I didn’t need a portfolio website.**

This meant that if a potential client wanted to see my work they had to ask me. (I even deleted my dribbble and twitter). This allowed me to keep track of every single person who wanted to see my work.

This also forced me to put an emphasis on the words I used in my emails – and eventually things like meetings and proposals. It lead me to crafting an offer specifically designed for the people I wanted to work with.

So, when I sat down to write my first emails, I avoided broad terms other designers used to describe their work. A lot of my peers described their work to clients in generic terms like “I do great user interface design.” I decided to learn niche phrases to startup culture like “conversion rate optimization,” and “lead generation,” instead.

One of the most effective things I did for my business during this time was focus on one thing: getting clients.

This is something that came easier for me because I ran a one person freelance business with a very clear goal — earn money by getting clients. It prioritized everything I did, because I was able to ask myself ‘is this directly helping me reach my goal?’ — at any point in my day.

This focus allowed all my energy and time to be dedicated on the most important thing to my business: making money. Almost as important, it allowed me to see what areas were a total waste of time. Things that weren’t directly helping me generate revenue were killed… this included; twitter, facebook, blogging, dribbble, reading emails etc.

It came down to me contacting people directly.

Other things, like twitter, might work for some people, but it didn’t work for me. What worked was emailing people directly. I put together a script using the tailored offer that I crafted and sent it out to dozens of startups throughout the six months. I used one site in particular for over 15k of my revenue.

Of course there were other, less-prolific job boards like craigslist, authentic jobs, and others, but the main idea was that I was using the same specific script to send out to many people. It felt so much better than sitting on my laurels and just posting stuff on twitter or dribbble.

I stopped letting the success of my business depend on outside forces like others contacting me.

Because of this, I was able to track where my efforts were getting the biggest return. I used excel to track leads. For example: every time I sent a new email, I would update the file for that particular lead source. If I heard back, I would again update the file. Soon I was able to see which of these job boards were responding with the highest frequency, and put all my effort there.

I also prepared for the future. Whenever a lead would email me back even if just to let me know they were going with another designer, I would put them in a new folder — a pool of past leads to follow up with in the future.

This pool quickly became my most valued source for new work.

Starting and depending on my freelance business taught me that you can’t listen to what other people say will work for you. If you do what everyone says you should do, you’ll be doing a little bit of everything. Trying the latest shiny tactic couldn’t hurt could right? The truth is, it can hurt. 

To be a successful freelancer I needed to focus on one thing, getting more clients, not everything.

Constantly updating my portfolio website, tweeting, and posting dribbble shots, might have felt like I was working on my freelance business, but in the end it was just a distraction.

I now know approximately how many leads I have to email in order to get a new client. 

Do you? How confident would you be if you did?

[Let's find out](/)

– Robert