---
layout: post
title:  "Exactly when to follow-up"
categories: follow-ups
---

5X5 technique

Since in another lesson we established that the person who actually wins the client isn’t the one who does the most prep-work or who sends the best email or at the first email. 

What really is the most important thing is the timing. So how do you know the right time to follow up on an email? When should you send a follow up without being too pushy. The last thing you want to do is annoy the person you’re emailing. 

How do you walk that skinny line between emailing too soon, and emailing too late. After all you also don’t want to hurt your chances by following up after the client has already made a decision or forgotten about you. 

Here at Workshop we’ve had the unique privilege of studying thousands of freelancer and agency emails to clients so we’ve been able to observe what works and what doesn’t. We’ve developed the perfect follow-up system. 

5 days. That’s how long you should wait in between followups. 5 days is the perfect number because it’s not so soon that the client feels rushed but it’s also not so long that you fall behind someone else. 

If a client is interested in hiring someone and it’s a decent project, 5 days is how long it takes to go from “omgosh I don’t know who to pick” to “ok I’m ready to pick someone”. That’s when you want to send your follow-up.

It also gives them time to breathe. I’m not kidding when I say that some client service firms like to follow-up the SAME DAY they send an email. Not only is this WAY to fast. It’s rude. Why are you assuming that every person checks  their email multiple times a day. 

Give me a break. Let me go a day or two or three before I respond to you. Don’t try to rush me because all that does is make me want to reply to you even less. 

On the other side of the spectrum is people who follow up too late. They wait for weeks before they send a followup. This is inconsiderate too. I need help now. Maybe your email fell behind and I didn’t have  a chance to respond… two weeks later you’ve missed the boat. I’ve moved on. I might’ve picked someone else or things have changed. You weren’t there to help guide that process so now you’ve lost the project. 

5-7 days is the optimal time to followup. No shorter, no later. Don’t succumb to the temptation that most fall into, you’re playing the long game. You’re not in the game of creating pressure tactics or fumbling along clumsily.

The next question is how many times do you follow-up? Now that you know that 5 days between your follow ups is the optimal amount of time - the next question becomes how many times becomes too much. 

There’s two different answers. One is for people who you email cold and don’t get a positive response. The answer here is you should only followup a maximum of 4-5 times. 

The reason is that if they’ve never shown interest then they’re probably not interested. That’s a long enough span to safely assume, if they can’t get back to you that you’ve probably struck out this time around. 

By all means follow up with them a few months down the line, but for now its safe to assume they’ve gone silent for long enough and you should move on. 

Make sure you make this clear though. On your final email send the magic email. Close the loop with your lead by saying “Since I haven’t heard from you on this I have to assume you’re not interested” leave it at that. 

This is one of the most effective ways of getting a response. Once you send this email don’t followup again for at least 4 months, if ever. 

Now the other type of person you follow up with is someone who HAS shown interest at some point. Maybe they were interested in your service or you even got into talks about their specific project and did some consultation or discovery calls.

When suddenly they stop responding. With these people it’s OK to followup forever. The thing is people get busy. As a client service business it’s your job to make sure they don’t forget about you. It’s YOUR job to make sure you look out for them and keep yourself and the project top of mind. 

Why is this your responsibility. Because your service is going to improve their business. Your service is going to create a net-positive ROI for them. They’ve already established they’re interested. They’re a busy business owner. They’re the person who stands to benefit. 

To look out for their best interest means to make sure they have the options available to them and not let them do anything less than the most they can accomplish. You are providing value before you ever start working by following up on a project that is going to create even more value for them. 

So once a client expresses interest followup forever. Keep following up every 5-7 days until you get a hard no from them. There are countless stories from sales teams who followup for months on end without hearing back. They just keep following up until eventually the busy business owner replies and says something like “hey thanks for being so persistent I was out of town but this is something I really need to do”

You know who’s awesome in that situation? You. Because you followed up. So now we’ve covered how long you should wait to follow up, and exactly how many times you should follow up. 

The magic of the followup happens when you begin to automate this process (that’s something we’re going to cover next).

But remember there’s value in a followup that comes at the right time. It’s all about timing. Don’t followup too soon - but make sure you follow up.